# create-pull-request

The create-pull-request action creates a local branch with all local changes in the git repository identified by the `working-directory` and automatically rebases or resets the branch depending on the remote state of the head branch.

When that branch is successfully created, a GitHub pull request is either created or updated.

If the head branch is deleted, the associated pull request will be automatically closed.

## Documentation

### Inputs

| Input | Description | Default |
|:-----:|-------------|---------|
| `base-ref` | The git reference to locally base the changes on. | `''` |
| `author` | The name and email address to use as the author of the local changes. | (GitHub Actor) [^1] |
| `committer` | The name and email address to use as the committer of the local changes. | (GitHub Actions Bot) [^2] |
| `branch` | The source branch name to use for the pull request. | `ci-pull-request` |
| `commit-message` | The commit message to use for local changes. | `DEFAULT`[^3] |
| `title` | The pull request title text. | `DEFAULT`[^4] |
| `body` | The pull request body text. | `DEFAULT`[^5] |
| `delete-unused` | An optional boolean value to indiciate whether the branch should be deleted if there are no changes. | `false` |
| `github-token` | The GitHub token required for the `gh` command-line utility to create or edit pull requests. The provided token needs to have the `pull-requests: write` permission. | `github.token` |
| `working-directory` | The path from which to run all git operations. | `github.workspace` |

[^1]: `ActorName <ActorId+Actor@users.noreply.github.com>`
[^2]: `github-actions[bot] <41898282+github-actions[bot]@users.noreply.github.com`
[^3]: "CI: Automatically generated changes."
[^4]: "CI: Automatically generated changes by create-pull-request action."
[^5]: "These changes have been automatically generated by CI."

### Outputs

| Output | Description |
|:------:|-------------|
| `pull-request-result` | A string value to indicate whether a pull requests was created, opened, or closed. |
| `pull-request-number` | The pull request number if one was created or updated. |
| `pull-request-url` | The pull request URL if one was created or updated. |

## Common Usage

The action expects a "dirty" checkout with either the currently checked-out `HEAD` as the bases for changes or the provided `base-ref`, but has no further prerequisites.


```yaml
    - name: Create Pull Request
      uses: ./.github/actions/create-pull-request
      with:
        author: 'GitHub CI <ci@myproject.com>'
        branch: 'ci-pull-requests'
        commit-message: 'Automated Changes'
        title: 'CI: Automatic Changes'
        body: >
          This is a multiline body for the pull request body.

          If the pull request already exists, its title and body will be replaced with each invocation
          of the action.
        delete-unused: true
        github-token: ${{ github.token }}
```

## Notes

The distinction between the `base-ref` and the `branch` is that the former identifies the reference (or branch) which the local changes will be rebased on, whereas the latter identifies to branch that the changes will be pushed onto.

This is potentially necessary if the changes are made based on the main branch but need to be based on another branch e.g., because the https://github.com/actions/checkout action only checked out the main branch before changes were made.

The action will handle all this internally but if there is no way to properly rebase the local branch onto the target branch, **the target branch will be reset** to the local variation of the branch.

## Developer Notes

This action encapsulates a lot of native `git` commands to ensure that the local changes are based on the correct base reference and also ensures that the necessary credentials are set up in case that the checkout has been made without persisting credentials (which is desired from a security POV).

The rough order of actions is:

* Detect the local checkout type and use the provided GitHub token to set up HTTPs authentication if necessary.
* Check if the checkout operate from is a branch or a detached HEAD. The base ref cannot be identical to the target branch.
* Create a local temporary branch with a random UUID and add all local changes as commits to this branch.
* If the local ref is a branch, reset it to the remote state of the same branch.
* If the base ref is different from the local ref, fetch the base ref from the remote and switch the checkout to it.
  * Identify all commits on the local temporary branch not present on the base ref, then cherry pick them.
  * Then reset the local temporary branch to the new HEAD based on the base ref with the cherry-picked commits.
  * Finally, reset the base ref back to the state on the remote.

At this point there will be a local temporary branch that is either based on the local ref or based on the specified base ref. Next the compatibility of the local temporary branch with the target branch on the remote need to be checked:

* Fetch the target branch from the remote based on the amount of changes between it and the local temporary branch.
* If the target branch does not already exist, simply create it based on the local temporary branch.
* If it does exist, create a local checkout first.
  * Next, check if the target branch is actually ahead of the base ref.
  * The target branch will be reset to the local temporary branch under a specific set of circumstances:
    * If the target branch has changes that do not exist on the temporary branch (which suggests that they were never merged into the base ref and suggests the branch has never been merged via a pull request).
    * If the branches have no diverting change-set (the same files were changed), but the amount of commits that encapsulate those changes differ.
    * If the temporary branch is actually behind the target branch.
    * If the branches have the same amount of commits and no different changed file list, but the actual changes on the target branch differ from the changes on the local temporary branch.

By the end of this process a local branch with the name of the target branch exists and contains all local changes based on the base ref and - if possible - rebased onto the target ref. The local temporary branch is not needed anymore and is deleted.

Finally this branch is force-pushed to the remote and the `gh` command-line utility used to create or update a pull request based on the author, source branch and target branch, which uniquely identify a GitHub pull request.
